About The Book
Isabella Swan’s move to Forks, a small, perpetually rainy town in Washington, could have been the most boring move she ever made. But once she meets the mysterious and alluring Edward Cullen, Isabella’s life takes a thrilling and terrifying turn. Deeply romantic and extraordinarily suspenseful, Twilight captures the struggle between defying our instincts and satisfying our desires. This is a love story with bite. This book is for all the vampire and love triangle fans out there. In the book, we follow Bella as she moves to Forks to live with her dad. There she forms a small friend group, and meets Jacob Black, the son of her dad’s best friend. However, Bella feels connection growing between her and the mysterious Edward Cullen. The two keep seem to be drawn together, and everyone knows the Cullen family are very interesting.
If you want a slow paced vampire book with some slow-burn romance, then this is the book for you. It is the first book in the Twilight saga, and typically first book in series do need a lot of world building. However, I found this book to be way too long. I felt like there was so much that we could have cut out and the outcome would have been the same. Being 500 pages long was completely unnecessary.
As for the characters, we didn’t get to really know anyone but Bella. Yet, we did learn a little about Edward and his family. Although, I think as the books progress we will get more information on the other characters and learn more about them. As for Bella, she was a very bland character with not much personality. She was bit boring and just average, which I assume is why Edward was so drawn to her.
“Death is Peaceful, Life is Harder.”
The story, as a whole, was very engaging. I found myself drawn in, and wanting to pick it up. I’m always down for a good vampire story, and if you know anything about this saga, soon we will have werewolves introduced as well. The ending was really fasted paced, and picked up, even though I felt like Bella did make some pretty dumb choices.
Now let’s talk about the writing. This book gets a lot of hate for being write like a fan fiction, which I think is disrespectful to fanfics, since some of them are actually written very well. I didn’t find the writing to be horrible, but it didn’t grip me like I wanted it to. It was very mediocre writing. There wasn’t anything special about it that helped make the story come to life.
Overall, it has the basics of a great story, and I’m excited to see where the next book goes. Still, I can understand why people say that this book has a stalker love trope kind of vibe. A few years back, that used to be a big no-no, but now in the age of dark romance and bully romance I can bet that some people are into the stalker trope.
In the comments, let me know when you first read the Twilight books. Don’t forget to hit the follow button, so that you get notified whenever there’s a new post like this one.